---
title: 'xagg: A Python package to aggregate gridded data onto polygons'
tags:
  - Python
  - xarray
  - geopandas
  - raster data
  - spatial statistics
authors:
  - name: Kevin Schwarzwald
    orcid: 0000-0001-8309-7124
    equal-contrib: false
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: "1, 2" # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Kerrie Geil
    equal-contrib: false # (This is how you can denote equal contributions between multiple authors)
    affiliation: 3
affiliations:
 - name: Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University, Palisades, NY, USA
   index: 1
 - name: International Research Institute for Climate and Society, Palisades, NY, USA
   index: 2
 - name: Geosystems Research Institute, Mississippi State University, Starkville, MS, USA
   index: 3
date: 22 August 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary
Scientific data (e.g. gridded weather observations, pollution data, night-time lights, or other remote sensing products) are often interpolated to or created on grids or raster pixels to approximate the continuous real world for ease of calculation, standardization, or due to technical limiations. However, the geospatial or administrative boundaries that occur in the real world rarely approximate a grid. For example, birds fly along complex migratory corridors, rain- and watersheds follow valleys and mountains, and many types of data, such as demographics or agricultural information, are often collected on the county, city, or census tract levels. Often, the geospatial and administrative boundaries that occur in the real world can be represented with polygons. 

When these raster and polygon worlds collide, as they often do in social or natural science research, data must be aggregated between them (e.g., @auffhammer_using_2013). This aggregation must, however, be done with care to preserve the integrity of the data and subsequent analysis. Consider a researcher working on population and mortality statistics for Los Angeles County. Using gridded temperature data in their work means aggregating the gridded data onto a polygon representing Los Angeles County (\autoref{fig1}). The simplest way to aggregate the data would be to average across every grid cell that overlaps with the county polygon. However, some grid cells may only slightly overlap with the county. The simplest aggregation technique would include these grid cells in the aggregated result with equal weight as grid cells fully within the county, which isn't ideal. Additionally, some grid cells may cover sparsely populated areas of the county, which could be unhelpful to include with equal weight in the aggregated result if studying, for example, the relationship between temperature and society.    

![Illustration of `xagg` workflow. Variables stored on a geographic grid (in this case 2-meter daily temperature from ERA5 reanalysis; @hersbach_era5_2020), a set of geographic polygons (in this case US county borders, focusing on Los Angeles County as an example), and an optional second weight on a geographic grid (in this case LandScan Day Population; @rose_landscan_2017) are inputted (panels a., c.). `xagg` calculates the relative overlap between each ERA5 grid cell and each county (panel b.). `xagg` regrids the population grid to the ERA5 grid (panel d.), and produces a set of final grid cell weights composed of both the area overlap and the population density (panel e.). For each county, these weights are used to calculate weighted averages of daily temperature (panel f.), which can be then be outputted in multiple formats for further analysis.\label{fig1}](xagg_joss_figure1.pdf)

Therefore, an ideal aggregation would weight not only by the area of overlap between grid cells and polygons, but also optionally by other densities of relevant variables - population, area planted, etc. [@auffhammer_using_2013].

`xagg` fulfills this need, by providing a simple interface for aggregating raster data stored in `xarray` [@hoyer_xarray_2017] `Datasets` or `DataArrays` onto polygons stored in `geopandas` [@bossche_geopandasgeopandas_2024] `geodataframes`, weighted by the fractional area overlap between the raster grid and the polygon, and optionally additionally weighted by a secondary gridded variable (see \autoref{fig1} for a sample workflow). Fractional area weights are generated by constructing polygons for each grid cell and using `geopandas`' `gpd.overlay()` function to calculate the overlaps between input polygons and grid cells. Aggregated data is then returned as an `xarray` `Dataset`, a `pandas` `DataFrame`, or a `geopandas` `GeoDataFrame`, depending on the user's needs.  


# Statement of need
Aggregating gridded data onto polygons is a fundamental aspect of much social and natural science research (e.g., @auffhammer_using_2013; @hsiang_estimating_2017; @carleton_valuing_2022; @mastrantonas_forecasting_2022). Historically, this process has been conducted on an ad hoc basis by individual research groups, often using simplifications such as averaging over all grid cells that overlap with a county, regardless of the size of that overlap (e.g,. @schlenker_nonlinear_2009). 

`xagg` fills a need for an easy, standardized, and accurate workflow for this aggregation. Accepting and outputting data in `xarray` and `*pandas` formats (including keeping by default relevant metadata and attributes from the inputted polygons) means `xagg` can be plugged into a wide array of existing workflows in natural and social sciences, and can easily export aggregated results in formats read by other languages often used in research, including R, QGIS, or STATA. 

Though other `python` packages facilitate the aggregation of raster data, to the authors' knowledge, none provide the same depth of functionality or conduct the final aggregation internally. The `mask_3D_frac_approx` function from the `regionmask` package [@hauser_regionmaskregionmask_2023] also creates weights from relative overlaps between grid cells and regions, for example; this however only works for regular rectangular grids (while `xagg` works with any rectangular grid), and results in more approximate overlaps than those calculated using `xagg`. In addition, none allow easy weighting by a secondary raster variable (e.g., population density or yield), or keep polygon metadata intact. 

`xagg` has already been used in peer-reviewed (e.g., @pulla_grace_2023-1; @mastrantonas_forecasting_2022; @schwarzwald_importance_2022) and upcoming (e.g., @sichone_assessment_2024; @peard_combining_2023) scientific publications, has reached over 15,000 cumulative downloads across versions, and is a key component of a how-to guide for climate econometrics [@rising_practical_2024]. 

# Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Ryan Abernathy, Julius Busecke, Tom Nicholas, and James Rising for help in getting this project off the ground, in addition to anyone who contributed to GitHub issues or the codebase over the years. 

# References
